Conform Zenoh spec to 1.5.8 (#103)
eclipse-uprotocol/up-spec: up-l1/zenoh.adoc

=== Zenoh Version

> We **MUST** use Zenoh version `0.11.0-rc` to ensure the interoperability in different language bindings.

Author: @gregmedd Just want to raise it up that we'll use 0.11.0-rc in up-spec 1.5.8. I think you're using it now.

=== URI Mapping

UUri **MUST** be able to be serialized into link:../basics/uri.adoc#short-uris[short form].
Then we can transform the short-form UUri into string for Zenoh key.

Zenoh key for uProtocol consists of three parts and they are separated by `/`.

* `up/`: Zenoh key **MUST** always start with `up/` and the scheme (`up://`) in the short UUri is always removed.

> * UAuthority: UAuthority is not mandatory, and it can be ignored in local UUri. However, it **MUST** always exist in Zenoh key.

Reviewer: Could you expand on this a bit? I'm having a hard time parsing it out.

Where is UAuthority not mandatory? Within the UURIs in a UMessage when calling `UTransport::send()`? When calling `UTransport::register_listener()`?

And if it's not mandatory, how do we ensure it always exists in the Zenoh key? The constructor which takes a UAuthority?

Author: I think I didn't describe it well. How about now?

> * `UE_ID`, `UE_VER_MAJOR`, and `URESOURCE_ID`: We reserve them in Zenoh Key.

Reviewer: Could you help me understand what reserve means in this case?

Author: I changed another way to describe it and hope it's clearer now :smile:

| CS6 | REAL_TIME
|===

==== TTL

The TTL only takes effect while sending RPC in the Zenoh implementation.

> TTL **SHOULD** be mapped to the timeout configuration in Zenoh query.

Author: Then TTL will not take effect. It'll use Zenoh default timeout.
Do you think we should use **MUST** here?

> TTL **SHOULD** be mapped to the timeout configuration in Zenoh query.

Author: Done.

=== URI Mapping

> UUri is transformed into Zenoh key in the implementation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
UUris are transformed into Zenoh key expressions following the format defined below.
```

The format of Zenoh key **MUST** be `up/[src authority]/[dst authority]/[entity_id]/[ue_version_major]/[resource_id]`

* `up/`: Zenoh key **MUST** always start with `up/`, which can be used to identify the uProtocol traffic.
* `src authority`: Indicates where the message comes from.
* `dst authority`: Indicates where the message is sent to. Must be `empty` in Publish type communication. `empty` is reserved word.
* `entity_id`, `ue_version_major` and `resource_id`: Might come from source or destination UUri depending on the communication type. They *MUST* be mapped to the upper-case base16 encoding.

[%autowidth]
|===
| Message Type | Zenoh Key

| Publish | up/src-authority/empty/src-entity/src-version/src-resource
| Notification | up/src-authority/dst-authority/dst-entity/dst-version/dst-resource
| Reqest | up/src-authority/dst-authority/dst-entity/dst-version/dst-resource
| Response | Don't need it since relying on Zenoh queryable mechanism
|===

> Some examples:

Reviewer 2: @evshary , I would just map the `URI notation` (a.k.a short form) to zenoh key expressions in the above table per message type in lieu of the code below to make it simpler to read

Author: Agree. Let me update it.

  .. // Not important
}
Destination UUri {
  authority_name: "192.168.1.100",
  ue_id: 0x0001_0002                // instance 1, service 2
  ue_version_major: 0x03,           // version 3
  resource_id: 0x800A               // resource 0x800A
}
----

The zenoh_key should be `up/192.168.1.99/192.168.1.100/10002/3/800A`

* Request

[example]
----
Source UUri {
  authority_name: "192.168.1.99",
  .. // Not important
}
Destination UUri {
  authority_name: "192.168.1.100",
  ue_id: 0x0001_0002                // instance 1, service 2
  ue_version_major: 0x03,           // version 3
  resource_id: 0x000B               // resource B
}
----

The zenoh_key should be `up/192.168.1.99/192.168.1.100/10002/3/B`

* Special UUri

[example]
----
Source UUri {
  authority_name: "*",
  .. // Not important
}
Destination UUri {
  authority_name: "192.168.1.100",
  ue_id: 0x0000_FFFF                // any instance, any service
  ue_version_major: 0xFF,           // any version
  resource_id: 0xFFFF               // any resource
}
----

This means we want to register the messages to a certain destination.
The zenoh_key should be `up/+++*+++/192.168.1.100/+++*+++/+++*+++/+++*+++`

=== UPayload

> UPayload consists of two parts: data, format.

Reviewer 2: Please see recent changes, there is no more UPayload. All we have is payload in UMessage and the UPayloadFormat is in UAttributes

Author: OK, it's merged now. Then I'll update it.

| CS6 | REAL_TIME
|===

==== TTL

The TTL only takes effect while sending RPC in the Zenoh implementation.

> TTL **MUST** be mapped to the timeout configuration in Zenoh query.

Reviewer 3: what about other messages that have timed out already on arrival? Would you still deliver those to registered listeners?

Author: Maybe I missed something, but is there any way for us to know when the message is sent? How does the receiver side know the message is timed out only with TTL?

Reviewer 2: The UUIDv8 defined in the specifications includes the timestamp from when the request message was generated.

Author: OK, I missed that.

> what about other messages that have timed out already on arrival? Would you still deliver those to registered listeners? Or send out messages in send() that have already timed out?

Then we should check whether messages time out or not on arrival in the transport implementation. Let me update it.

Author: Hmm... do you think we should drop the expired messages on the transport layer (Zenoh, MQTT..), or just passed to users and leave the decisions to them?

[source, rust]
----
Encoding::WithSuffix(
    KnownEncoding::AppCustom,
    payload.format.value().to_string().into(),
)
----

=== URI Mapping

UUri are transformed into Zenoh key expressions following the format defined below.
The format of Zenoh key **MUST** be `up/[src authority]/[dst authority]/[entity_id]/[ue_version_major]/[resource_id]`

* `up/`: Zenoh key **MUST** always start with `up/`, which can be used to identify the uProtocol traffic.
* `src authority`: Indicates where the message comes from.
* `dst authority`: Indicates where the message is sent to. Must be `empty` in Publish type communication. `empty` is reserved word.
* `entity_id`, `ue_version_major` and `resource_id`: Might come from source or destination UUri depending on the communication type. They *MUST* be mapped to the upper-case base16 encoding.

Different type of communication in uProtocol maps to different Zenoh keys, just like the following table.

[%autowidth]
|===
| Message Type | Zenoh Key

| Publish | up/src-authority/{}/src-entity/src-version/src-resource
| Notification | up/src-authority/dst-authority/dst-entity/dst-version/dst-resource

> | Reqest | up/src-authority/dst-authority/dst-entity/dst-version/dst-resource

Reviewer 3: Request

| Response | Don't need it since relying on Zenoh queryable mechanism
|===

Note that since authority is case-insensitvie and allows some special characters defined in link:https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3986#section-3.2.2[RFC3986, Section 3.2.2]. Zenoh needs to use `{}` to escape these characters and transform all the alphbets to lowercase.

[%autowidth]
|===

> | Speical Characters in authority | Zenoh Key

Reviewer 3: Special characters ...

| empty | `{}`
| `$` | `{dollar}`
|===

Take some examples:

[%autowidth]
|===
| Use Case | Source UUri | Sink UUri | Zenoh Key

> | Publish | up://192.168.1.100/1002/3/800A | - | up/192.168.1.100/{}/10002/3/800A

Reviewer 3: `up/192.168.1.100/{}/1002/3/800A`

Author: oops...

> | Notification | up://192.168.1.99/... | up://192.168.1.100/1002/3/800A | up/192.168.1.99/192.168.1.100/10002/3/800A

Reviewer 3: `up/192.168.1.100/{}/1002/3/800A`

> | Request | up://MYHOST1/... | up://myhost$/1002/3/B | up/myhost1/myhost{dollar}/10002/3/B

Reviewer 3: `up/myhost1/myhost{dollar}/1002/3/B`

> | uStreamer | up://+++*+++/... | up://192.168.1.100/FFFF/FF/FFFF | up/+++*+++/192.168.1.100/+++*+++/+++*+++/+++*+++

Reviewer 3: Where do these `+` signs come from?

Author: Used to escape asterisk.
https://asciidoc-py.github.io/userguide.html#X77

=== URI Mapping

UUri **MUST** be able to be serialized into link:../basics/uri.adoc#short-uris[short form].

> Then we can transform the short-form UUri into string for Zenoh key.

Reviewer 4: Two questions:
- Does zenoh comply with the short form URI requirement that URIs are case insensitive? This matters for ID and IPv6 authorities - if zenoh is not case insensitive, then we need to add a requirement that case is normalized (e.g. lower-case the whole key)
- How are IP addresses normalized? Particularly with IPv6 (but also to a lesser extent IPv4), there are many ways to write the same address. If zenoh keys are a literal match, then we should probably define what the normalized address format is.

Author: We use the definition of short-form in up-spec
https://github.com/eclipse-uprotocol/up-spec/blob/main/basics/uri.adoc#51-remote-uris
However, you raise a good point. I'm not sure whether short form URI should take care of case sensitive or not.
@stevenhartley Do you know that?

Reviewer 2: The case sensitivity of URIs are covered in the URI spec:

```
Schema and authority MUST be case-insensitive per RFC3986
Path, query, and message MUST be case-sensitive
```

If Zenoh key expressions cannot handle the case differences then I recommend we normalize it and define that in the zenoh.adoc spec.

Author: I thought the definition here was only for long-format before.
Ok, then we should normalize it to lowercase in Zenoh key.

Reviewer 4: @evshary

I've looked at the change, and I'm not sure that it helps clarify the needs of normalization. The big concern for me is how IP addresses are normalized - for example, there are many ways to write an IPv6 address that all represent the same address but have different strings. It's not just whether the characters are upper case or lower case. Do we keep or drop leading zeros (both IPv6 and IPv4)? Always compact groups of zeros with `::` or always expand `::`? Do we convert the dual-format addresses (e.g. `2001:db8::f00f:192.168.1.4` or `::1.1.1.1`) to native IPv6 formats?

One option would be to parse the IP address string then convert it back to a string using the APIs provided by Linux, and that behavior becomes spec. Another would be to look at RFCs to see if there is a spec for normalization of addresses.

The second concern I have with the change is that the new language on converting to lower case is unclear. It sounds like the entire key would be converted to lower case, but _only the schema and authority_ should be case insensitive (and lower cased in the key), if I'm understanding what @stevenhartley said earlier..

Reviewer 2: @gregmedd I think the best way forward is to explicitly state that the IP address must follow [RFC5952](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5952). I added this to https://github.com/eclipse-uprotocol/up-spec/issues/115

Author: @gregmedd
For the first one, I think it will not be a problem if the IP address always follows RFC5952 in up-spec.
For the second one, yes, I should limit the transformation only to the schema and authority.

Author: Done.

Zenoh key for uProtocol consists of three parts and they are separated by `/`.

> * `up/`: Zenoh key **MUST** always start with `up/` and the scheme (`up://`) in the short UUri is always removed.

Reviewer 4: Out of curiosity, is there a reason not to just keep the scheme from the short URI? It's only two extra characters, but removes a whole extra string operation that is unique to Zenoh and applied to a string that is otherwise already formatted correctly. Does Zenoh treat `:` or `/` as special characters?

If there's no specific need for this, we could reduce the amount of code that has to be written, tested, and maintained by keeping the scheme from the short URI.

Author: You're right. We can't have `//` in Zenoh key.

> * UAuthority: Although UAuthority does not exist in local UUri, it **MUST** be used in Zenoh key. We can use the UAuthority which is initialized in the constructor in this case.

Author: We need to define UAuthority and UEntity while creating UPClientZenoh.
It's necessary to fill the source address in the UAttribute when we call `invoke_method`
https://github.com/eclipse-uprotocol/up-spec/pull/103/files#diff-540fb00cfbe38ece62de18b3a95419f71516df5fb08cc89402bf33235411ae7fR50

=== URI Mapping

UUri **MUST** be able to be serialized into link:../basics/uri.adoc#short-uris[short form].
Then we can transform the short-form UUri into string for Zenoh key.

Zenoh key for uProtocol consists of three parts and they are separated by `/`.

> * `up/`: Zenoh key **MUST** always start with `up/` and the scheme (`up://`) in the short UUri is always removed.

Reviewer 2: Serialize to short and long with Java doesn't add the scheme, does up-rust add the scheme? Perhaps we should remove it as it was optional anyways.

Author: You're right. No scheme while serializing to short and long in up-rust. I'll remove this description.

* UAuthority: Although UAuthority does not exist in local UUri, it **MUST** be used in Zenoh key. We can use the UAuthority which is initialized in the constructor in this case.
* `UE_ID`, `UE_VER_MAJOR`, and `URESOURCE_ID`: These should be kept in Zenoh Key and also separated by `/`.

To be more specific, the format of Zenoh Key is:

> `up/[UAuthoriy]/[UE_ID]/[UE_VER_MAJOR]/[URESOURCE_ID]`

Reviewer 2: This is 1:1 mapping of short form URI now so I would just state that you use the short form URI for zenoh key expressions.

The UAuthority of short-form UUri is case-insensitive, but Zenoh key is case-sensitive.

> We **MUST** transform all the alphabets of the UAuthority into lowercase.

Reviewer 2: hum.... perhaps the serializer should do this in lieu of inside of the transport and we make short form URI case sensitive, what say you @sophokles73 & @AnotherDaniel ?

Reviewer 3: So far, we have tried to keep very close to the URI definition of RFC3986. As I pointed out to @evshary in https://github.com/eclipse-uprotocol/up-spec/pull/121#issuecomment-2078684079, we should be able to make small restrictions while maintaining overall compatibility. Making authority case-sensitive would potentially start breaking compatibility IMHO. I do not see an issue with letting the transport decide what to do with the authority in order to make it work for them. Restricting the allowed characters in the authority name might still be worthwhile, though, in order to increase general _interoperability_ with transports.

[%autowidth]
|===

> | Speical characters in authority | Zenoh Key

Reviewer 3: I was actually more concerned with the typo in `Speical` ;-)

Author: oh, I missed that typos :laughing:

}
----

It's a local URI, and the short format of the UUri should be `/1/1234/5678` in this case.

> Let's assume the UAuthority is `192.168.1.100`.

Reviewer 4: I'm unclear how we can assume that when we have just said UAuthority is not set because it's a local URI. This should probably be clarified.

Author: Maybe I should add more description. UAuthority is defined when creating the UPClientZenoh.

Author: Done.

}
----

It's a local URI, and the short format of the UUri should be `/1/1234/5678` in this case.
Let's assume users initialize the UPClienZenoh with the UAuthority `192.168.1.100`.
Therefore, the Zenoh key will become `up/192.168.1.100/1/1234/5678`.

* The remote UUri with UAuthority

[source]
----
UUri {
  authority: UAuthority {

>     name: "UAuthName",

Reviewer 2: Please see https://github.com/eclipse-uprotocol/up-spec/pull/121, we are dropping id and ip from UAuthority.

Author: OK, I'll update it after the PR is merged.

==== Transfer Publish message

1. A uEntity (`origin-authority/origin-entity`) creates a message with
    * source: `up://origin-authority/origin-entity/origin-version/origin-resource`
    * sink: `-`

2. `UTransport.send` maps source (**origin UUri**) to Zenoh key

>     * `up/` + `origin-authority/empty/origin-entity/origin-version/origin-resource`

Reviewer 3: That would then be
`up/` + `origin-authority/{}/origin-entity/origin-version/origin-resource`
I guess

Author: You're right. I forgot to update here...

3. Subscriber registers a listener

>     * source: `up://origin-authority/empty/origin-entity/origin-version/origin-resource`

Reviewer 3: source: `up://origin-authority/origin-entity/origin-version/origin-resource`

    * sink: `-`

4. which `UTransport.registerListener` maps to Zenoh key

>     * `up/` + `origin-authority/empty/origin-entity/origin-version/origin-resource`

Reviewer 3: `up/` + `origin-authority/{}/origin-entity/origin-version/origin-resource`

    * sink: `up://dest-authority/dest-entity/dest-version/dest-resource.instance`

2. `UTransport.send` maps sink (**destination UUri**) to Zenoh key
    * `up/` + `origin-authority/dest-authority/dest-entity/dest-version/dest-resource`

3. Receiver (dest-authority/dest-entity) registers a listener on **destination UUri**
    * source: `-`
    * sink: `up://dest-authority/dest-entity/dest-version/dest-resource.instance`

4. which `UTransport.registerListener` maps to Zenoh key

>     * `up/` + `+++*+++/dest-authority/dest-entity/dest-version/dest-resource`

Reviewer: I feel like this has been settled at this point, I just don't recall the conversation...

So for Notification messages, the latter parts of the Zenoh key (entity, version, resource) are pulled from the destination, not the source?

Would we want the ability to discriminate at the `registerListener` level as to which source the Notification is coming from? If that were the case, I suppose we'd have to put the latter parts (entity, version, resource) from the source and modify the `registerListener` example to show us using the `source` field.

Author: > So for Notification messages, the latter parts of the Zenoh key (entity, version, resource) are pulled from the destination, not the source?

Only Publish messages use source as the latter part of Zenoh key. Notification and Request only care about the destination.

> Would we want the ability to discriminate at the registerListener level as to which source the Notification is coming from? If that were the case, I suppose we'd have to put the latter parts (entity, version, resource) from the source and modify the registerListener example to show us using the source field.

I don't quite get your point. Maybe retrieving the source information from uAttributes is enough?

==== Message routing

1. A streamer that is interested in all incoming messages for dest-authority registers a listener for

>     * source: `-`

Reviewer: Can't leave the comment high up enough. I'm referring to [this line](https://github.com/eclipse-uprotocol/up-spec/blob/main/basics/uri.adoc#611-matching-on-authority).

With the separation coming between uP-L1 and uP-L2, I have a question: would the `up-client-foo-rust` libraries be responsible for / be expected to implement uP-L2? Or would they _optionally_ implement uP-L2, but allow for the posibility of plugging in the UTransport implementation they made into e.g. the RpcClient "default" implementation we'd have in `up-rust`?

Tagging @sophokles73 in for this one as well to hear his thoughts.

>     * sink: `up://dest-authority/FFFF/FF/FFFF`

Reviewer: @evshary -- I'm honestly not sure what's better from a readability standpoint. I think we could also represent this as:
```
* sink: `up://dest-authority/0000FFFF/FF/FFFF`
```
according to the [spec](https://github.com/eclipse-uprotocol/up-spec/blob/main/basics/uri.adoc#611-matching-on-authority), right?

Author: I agree with you that this is more readable.
The reason why I omit the `0000` is that the example in spec always does so.
Since the entity includes service and instance, it might be better to show the whole hex string in entity and avoid the ambiguity.

Author: After a second look, it might be better for the designer to give us some direction.
@sophokles73 Do you think we should use `0000FFFF` instead of `FFFF` to match all any instances and any types in ue_id?

BTW, out of curiosity, why do you choose `0000` to stand for any instance?

Reviewer 3: > BTW, out of curiosity, why do you choose 0000 to stand for any instance?

In almost all cases, the sender of a message does not care about which service instance its request is being sent to. Using `0x0000` for the 16 MSB in this case will lead to a URI that is four characters shorter than including `0xFFFF`, because we can simply omit the leading zeros.

Reviewer 3: > Do you think we should use 0000FFFF instead of FFFF to match all any instances and any types in ue_id?

It doesn't make any difference FMPOV
